--- PAGE 1 ---
On-the-fly Range -Velocity  Radar Data Compression  Exploring 
Doppler Spectrum Redundancy  
 
Zoran Zivkovic , Liang Li 
 
NXP Semiconductors  
High Tech Campus 46 , Eindhoven , The Netherlands  
email: zoran.zivkovic @nxp.com, liang.li@nxp.com  
 
Abstract: Radar systems extract ing target range and velocity use  sequence  of pulses in 
Pulse -Doppler systems , or sequence of short chirps for  Frequency Modulation 
Continuous Wave ( FMCW) radar. In both cases large amount of intermediate data needs 
to be stored  before extracting the velocity information from the Doppler spectrum. An on-
the-fly compression scheme is presented here that can reduce  the needed storage space . 
The technique explor es the redundancies in the Doppler spectrum. Basic compression 
architecture is described to ta ke advantage of the nature of the data -generation process . 
A number of  imple mentation options are proposed and  evaluated on simulated and on 
real data. The proposed method is lossless . Practical “lossy” versions with fixed 
compression rate are also derived  which allow graceful deg radation of the performance 
and are suitable for embedded implementation.  
 
 
1. Introduction  
The Pulse -Doppler radar has been used for many years to simultaneously estimate t he 
distance and radial velocity  of the detected objects  [1]. Multiple pulses are transmitted  and the 
received echoes binned over the range. The velocity can be extracted from the mu ltiple pulses 
in each range bin . Velocity  information allows discrimination betwe en objects  moving at 
different speeds , e.g. an aircr aft, a vehicl e or the  background clutter . The Frequency 
Modulation Continuous Wave ( FMCW) radar with short chirps is  becoming popular for  
simultaneously measuring the distance and the radial velocity [2,3,4]. In both cases the nature 
of the data acquis ition and processing is similar . If the system is using M range measurements 
and N range bins, before extracting the velocity information the whole matrix containing M*N 
values need s to be stored in the memory , as illustrated in Figure 1 . Phased array radars use 
multiple antennas to extract  angular information . If the system has L antennas the to tal 
number of bins that need to be stored becomes L*M*N . It is also anticipated that the storage 
needs will increase  for modern systems : 
 The radar data has typically large dynamic range , so with increasing requirements in 
the future, more bits will b e needed per bin  
 Better r esolution will increase the number of elements for all three  dimensions L, M 
and N of the stored data  
For example , in a system with M=1024  velocity b ins and N=1024  range bins and L=32  
antennas, the memory space becomes 256MB, where we assumed  32+32  bit representation 
per complex number per bin. The l arge memory can increase the costs of a  radar system  
especially for fully integrated solutions.  Furtherm ore, the memory readout speed limitations 
can introduce latency in detecting targets.  
The radar data is typically sparse [5]  and range -velocity data contains a lot of redundancy and 
potentially can be compressed . Furthermore, in most radar system only the target positions 
and velocities are of interest , therefore the mentioned memory space is just an intermediate 
buffer needed to store the intermediate processing results.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on May 17,2026 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On-the-fly compression of the memory content is common for many high performance 
systems [6]. A radar specific scheme is proposed here . While there are many options to 
explore the data redundanc y, exploring t he Doppler spectrum is the most natural fit to the 
typical range -velocity radar system s. The classical compression techniques such as  Bzip or 
LZO could be also  applied but they do not exploit  the nature of the radar data. Image based 
techniques, such as  JPEG , could be used  on the full data matrix, but this would not be on -the-
fly compression .  The technique proposed here is more effecti ve as it will be shown.  
This paper is organized as follows. First , the general compression scheme is described. 
Practical implementation choices are discussed next. Afterwards, some simulation and real 
data experiments and evaluation are presented. The f inal section contains the conclusions and 
the further work topics.  
 
 
Figure  1.  Data acquisition and processing basic structure for a typical range -velocity radar  system.   
 
 
2. Basic lossless compression scheme  
Typical d ata acquis ition and processing  flow is described in Figure 1. In the “short chirp” 
FMCW case [2] the range processing is the first FFT for each range measurement . The 
velocity is extracted by the second FFT pass over the columns. An e xample of simulated 
FMCW data is  shown in Figure 2. The data compression and decompression blocks are added 
to reduce the size of the memory needed for the intermediate data before the second FFT pass. 
If the objects are detected also on -the-fly after performing the second FFT , the inter mediate 
data is the only large amount of data that needs to be kept in the memory. Reducing the size 
of this memory buffer by compression techniques presented here can largely reduce the costs 
of the radar system and often also increase the speed of proces sing if the memory data reading 
is a limiting factor.  The basic elements of the compression scheme are illustrated in Figure 3 . 
Details for each block are discussed next.  
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on May 17,2026 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
Figure 2 .  Example FMCW simulated data  processing wit h on-the-fly data compression and decompression . 
 
Let each distance measurement have  N bins/ elements , and let M be the number of 
measurements performed for the speed estimation . After the range processing, e.g. the first 
FFT, a  measurement m consist s of N complex numbers  X(m,1),...,X(m,N) . The measurement 
represents a  row of the ful l M*N  measurement matrix . A column n corresponds to a distance.  
The compression steps are the following. First, e ach incoming complex value  is compared to 
the model prediction , as in Figure 3. T he prediction is in the amplitude and phase  form:  
 ˆˆ ˆ , ,jθa m n e X m n
 
where 
ˆa  and 
ˆθ  are the predicted magnitude and phase respectively. For the magnitude : 
           ˆ 1, (ˆ ,, 1 )1 a m n αa α a m nmn
 
the current predicted value 
ˆ , a m n  is a linear combination of previous predicted value 
1,ˆmna
 and the last incoming magnitude value 
1, a m n . For the phase prediction:  
 

      

                  ,
,
, 1, 1ˆ,,
1,
1 1, ,mdl incMdl
mdl
incMdl incMdl mdlθ m n θ m n θ
θ θ m nmn
mn
m n m n m nθ βθ β θ m n θ
 
The phase prediction 
ˆθ  is the sum of the phase model value 
mdlθ  and the increment 
model
incMdlθ . The phase model is simply the last phase of the incom ing data. The phase 
increment model is a linear combination of the last value of the increment model and the 
difference between the last incoming data and the last model value.  The two predic tors act 
like two IIR filters with tunable parameters, namely 
α  and 
β . Intuitively, the two parameters 
control how fast the prediction s are influenced and modified by the real input signal.  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on May 17,2026 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Figure 3 .  Basic elements of the on -the-fly compression scheme . 
 
The difference between the measured data and the prediction  
ˆ [ , ] ,X m n X m n  is further 
encoded and saved to the memory.  
3. Encoding  
 
 
SSSS  Value range  Number of possible values  
1 -1,1 2 
2 -3,-2,2,3  4 
3 [-7,-4], [4,7]  8 
… 
   
   
15 [-32767, -16384], [16384, 32767]  32768  
 
Figure  4 Example of e ncoding the difference s 
 
There are two main characteristics of the difference data. The first is that there are many zeros 
in the data. The second is that small value s are much more frequent than large values . Here 
we will apply encoding similar to the encoding used in the JPEG standard  to explore these 
data characteristics . 
Figure 4 shows the encoding procedure with the example input difference data [1, 0, 3, 0, 0, 0,  
0, 253] (each is a 16 -bit value).  Each value  in the input data stream will be encoded into a 
binary form of [RRRRSSSS+APPEND] where RRRRSSSS is an 8 -bit field and APPEND is 
an SSSS -bit field . For convenience, the name R4S4 might be used instead of RRRRSSS S in 
the following text.  The 4 -bit RRRR  field in R4S4 is the number of zeroes preceding a non -
zero data while SSSS is the region that the non -zero data is in and is also the number of bits 
that APPEND needs to encode the exact data value.  
Table in Figure 4  gives the SSSS values and corresponding ranges.  The length of the 
APPEND field bits is variable but the R4S4 fi eld are fixed (8 bits ) where Huffman  coding is 
used.  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on May 17,2026 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
4. Practical implementation with efficient memory addressing   
Due to the use of the Huffman encoding, the length of the encoded data is variable and the 
total length of each column is not the same  as illustrated in Figure 5  (top) . Proper memory 
management has to be implemented if we want to reach high memory usage efficiency  and 
fast readout of the compressed data . The principle is to reserve memory for future use  as 
illustrated  in the example presented in  Figure  5 (bottom).  
 
Figure 5 .  Variable data length per column (top), example  memory reshaping  for efficient addressing (bottom).  
 
The un compressed data in this example has 512 columns , each with  2048 bits of data  
represented by the red rectangle . The smaller rectangles , yellow  and green , represent  the 
target compression ratio  of 5, in this case  it translates to 406 bits per column . Since t he 
column length is variable , some of the columns might exceed the reserved space. Therefore 
extra space is reserved for overflowed columns,  i.e. the yellow  region is reserved and is 
appended to the end of the normal memory region (the area of yellow  regio n and right -
inclined filled green region on left side are the same). So the memory actually has 717 
columns of 290 bits space resulting in the  fixed compression ratio  of 5. 
The presented memory addressing allows efficient data readout but not fully efficie nt use of 
the memory since some of the columns might not be completely filled.  Furthermore, the 
lossless compression cannot be guaranteed if fixed memory size is reserved. If the complete 
memory is filled , some data points at some of the columns need to be  skipped . This will 
introduce reduction in the signal to noise ratio for detectio n. The target compression ratio  can 
be tuned to achieve the desired performance, see examples in the next section.  
4. Results  
Simulated and real data was used  to evaluate the compression scheme. Two  simulated 
scenarios were used . First , a simple scenario where 10 targets were randomly placed  with 
random speeds . The complex scenario has multiple object on purpose located at the same 
distance but with different speed s. This makes  the Doppler spectrum more complex and 
difficult to compress/predict  by the simple model used here . For the real data , a 79GHz radar 
with 1 GHz bandwidth chirp was used. The real radar data was collected on a street with a 
moving vehicle and sometimes pede strians present.  The achieved compression ratios are 
given in Table 1. For comparison we applied a number of lossless compression algorithms : 
LZO, Gzip, WinZip . For the propo sed compression  ideal lossless compression ratio is 
reported first . In all cases the scheme presented here largely outperforms any of the standard 
compression tools. The reason is that the nature of the data is better explored in this radar 
signal specific scheme , even though a fixed Huffman encoding table is used. The fixed 
encoding t able is cons tructed based on simulated data and used in all presented cases.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on May 17,2026 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Simulated data  (simple)  Simulated data  (hard) Real data  
Ideal  (excluding memory addressing)  9.8 7.3 9.7 
Practical lossy (target 5) - (% data loss)  5.0 - (0%)  5.0 - (0.04%) 5.0 - (0%)  
Practical lossy (target 6) - (% data loss)  6.0 - (0%)  6.0 - (1.8%) 6.0 - (0.005 %) 
Practical lossy (target 7) - (% data loss)  7.0 - (0.005%) 7.0 - (3.0%) 7.0 - (0.42 %) 
LZO ( level 1-fast) 2.9 2.7 3.3 
LZO  (level 9-slow-high compression ) 5.7 4.9 6.2 
WinZip  6.5 5.5 7.5 
Gzip  6.7 5.8 7.7 
 
Table 1 .  Compression results . The percentage of lost data points is reported for the  practical “lossy” 
implementation with the target f ixed compression ratio within brackets. All other schemes are lossless.  
The id eal lossless compres sion scheme could be applied off -line, but it is impractical for real -
time processing purposes. The practical “lossy” implementation with efficient memory 
addressing is applied using a number of fixed target compression ratios.  Table 1 lists 
percentage of the data points that could not fit into the memory  for each target ratio . The lost 
data introduces  proportional reduction of the signal to noise ratio in the Doppler spectrum. 
The compression ratios and the amount of lost data vary depe nding on the data . The most 
difficult is the “hard” simulated case that deliberately contains a complex Doppler spectrum.  
4. Conclusions  
Data compression technique tailored to the  range -velocity radar systems  is described . The 
data redundancy in the Dopple r spectrum is explored. The data is compressed on-the-fly after 
the “range” processing and before the “velocity” processing step to reduce the memory size 
needed to store the intermediate data.  This simple technique is shown to be able to pr ovide 
large com pression factors outperforming  common general purpose compression schemes. A 
practical efficient implementation with fixed target compression ratio is presented that gives 
also competitive compression factors , typically with small data losses.  
Basic elemen ts outlined here can be further improved. First,  the prediction model can be made 
more elaborate or tailored for specific situation. In case of phased array radar with multiple 
antennas the model could explore the redundan cy between antennas as well. Secon d, various 
other adaptive encoding schemes could be applied . Finally, the memory addressing can be 
further extended for practical compression ratio s closer to the ideal case.  
Acknowledgements  
We would  like to thank Feike  Jansen, Artur Burchard and Alessio Filippi for the discussions . 
 
Reference s: 
[1] M.I. Skolnik, "Radar handbook.", 1970.  
[2] A. Stove, “Li near FMCW Radar Techniques,” IEE Proceedings Radar and Signal Processing, 
UK, 1992 . 
[3] H. Rohling and M. Kronauge, “Waveform Design for Automotive Radar”, Chapter 1 0 in 
Waveform Design and Diversity for Advanced Radar Systems,” in Institution of Engineering 
and Technology (IET), 2012.  
[4] M. Kronauge and H. Rohling. "New chirp sequence radar waveform." Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems, IEEE Transactions on 50.4 (2014): 2 870-2877.  
[5] J. Ender . "A brief review of compressive sensing applied to radar." Radar Symposium (IRS), 
2013 14th International. Vol. 1. IEEE, 2013.  
[6] R. B. Tremaine, P. A. Franaszek, J. T. Robinson, C. O. Schulz, T. B. Smith, M. E. Wazlowski 
and P. M. Bland, " IBM me mory expansion technology (MXT) ", IBM Journal of Research and 
Development, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 271 -285, 2001.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on May 17,2026 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

